Rewrite Aranya-Sessions Document (#11)
aranya-project/aranya-docs: src/Aranya-Sessions-note.md

---
title: Aranya Session Design Notes
taxonomy:
    category: docs
---

## Rationale

> It is sometimes useful to be able to use the strong trust provided by the existing graph without having to pay the costs of storing additional data on-graph. We therefore need a mechanism that can evaluate policy locally at a specific "perspective" in the graph, which we call an Aranya Session. This is an 'ephemeral' session that allows us to process commands as we would normally, but whose data will be lost afterwards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is sometimes useful to leverage the strong security guarantees provided by the existing Aranya graph without incurring the costs of storing additional data on-graph. We therefore need a mechanism that can evaluate policy locally at a specific "perspective" in the graph, which we call an Aranya Session. This is an 'ephemeral' session that  processes commands as we would normally, but whose data is only temporarily stored in memory and will be lost after restarting the application or power cycling hardware.
```

> This is useful, for example, when creating a potentially lighter-weight protocol or an [Aranya Fast Channel (AFC)](afc.md), as only a few endpoints may require specific session data. If this were on-graph, we would have to pay the cost of propagating this to all other nodes, which can be extremely costly depending on the amount of data and the number of nodes involved.

Reviewer: There is a cost to syncing and storing in non-volatile memory (e.g. disk)

## Challenges
Any data that affects the persistent fact database *must* be on-graph; therefore, while we can update the facts in a session, it is not possible to have those changes persist.

## Design

> At its highest level, an Aranya Session is just a perspective that cannot be committed to the graph.

Reviewer 2: Yeah it contains both. A perspective is a sequence of commands and the facts they produced, and is based off some point on the graph. It is also the "in progress" version of a graph segment. Sort of like a local git branch.

> At its highest level, an Aranya Session is just a perspective that cannot be committed to the graph.

Reviewer 3: > It is also the "in progress" version of a graph segment. Sort of like a local git branch.

This is what I was mostly curious about. So a perspective can refer both to the current total state (i.e., like Chip said, the entire FactDB as well as the entire set of commands that produced it) AND to a portion of the state that's produced by a subset of commands on a particular branch?

> At its highest level, an Aranya Session is just a perspective that cannot be committed to the graph.

Reviewer 2: Conceptually, it's a cursor of the command/fact state at some point in time. Physically, it's a sequence of commands and fact updates that haven't been written to the graph. Not quite following what you're saying to know if that matches.

> Additionally, the order of commands is defined by the order that they're added to the perspective, instead of being ordered by the graph resolving various commands. Because of this, commands added to an Aranya Session's perspective don't require a parent field, although for simplicity our initial implementation may retain this feature.

Reviewer: Let's reference the normal `graph.md` ordering here.

To make use of this session perspective, some additional changes to the API will be required.

### Add Command

> The Aranya Client currently can only accept new commands via `sync_receive()` or by calling  `action()`. This leaves us with no easy way to add commands from a remote device to a session perspective. To fix this, we should add an `add_command()` method to the Aranya Client that attempts to add a command to a session perspective.

Reviewer 2: Yes, we now have `Session::receive`: https://github.com/aranya-project/aranya-core/blob/6477b855273683e97eea7bc14b8712bcf66c70f8/crates/aranya-runtime/src/client/session.rs#L122-L127
